Coup-plotting allegations in Turkey
Bugged out

HIS /O colleagues hailed him as a "soldier-intellectual." But yesterday Ilker Başbuğ, a former chief of Turkey's general staff, was jailed in Istanbul on charges of belonging to a terrorist gang bent on overthrowing Turkey's mildly Islamist government.

Mr Başbuğ, who retired in 2010, is the highest-ranking officer to be arrested so far in the ongoing "Ergenekon" probe into assorted generals and their supposed allies in academia, the media and the business world who are accused of seeking to overthrow the government. Mr Başbuğ's alleged role in the conspiracy was to oversee a bevy of army-owned internet news portals that purported to prove that the government was seeking to introduce religious rule.

Mr Başbuğ is the first former army chief to be prosecuted in a civilian court. His arrest brings to 139 the number of generals and admirals, both serving and retired, who have been jailed on suspicion of coup-plotting.

Supporters of Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, the prime minister, say the move is a further step towards the government's consolidation of civilian control over an army that has toppled four governments since 1960. Until recently the generals were deemed untouchable, partly thanks to a swathe of laws they inserted into the constitution they wrote after their last coup, in 1980.

Mr Erdoğan and his Justice and Development (AK) party have been steadily trimming their powers, most recently through a set of constitutional amendments that among other things allow the generals to be tried in civilian courts. These changes were approved by 58% of voters in a referendum in 2010, further cementing AK's power.

Yet critics of the Ergenekon arrests say they have more to do with settling scores than with the rule of law. Defence lawyers have presented forensic reports suggesting that some of the evidence against their clients has been doctored.

Eric Edelman, a former American ambassador to Turkey and number two at the Pentagon under George W. Bush, got to know Mr Başbuğ. He says: "The notion that he headed a terrorist organisation just strains credulity".

It will also, he says, "underscore the serious questions about Turkey's continued commitment to press freedom and the rule of law." That commitment is waning. Nearly 500 students are in prison facing "terrorism" charges for such infractions as demanding free education. Some 97 journalists have also been imprisoned, many on similarly absurd grounds.

Mr Erdoğan's increasingly authoritarian ways have prompted claims that his government has simply swapped places with the army. His supporters have a different worry. They say that having purged the old guard in the military, he is now cutting deals with the new set.

That would help explain why the prime minister is supporting their renewed campaign against rebels of the separatist Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK). This took a tragic turn last week when Turkish warplanes bombed a group of Kurdish civilians in northern Iraq, killing at least 34 of them. When conspiracists started to murmur Mr Erdogan rushed to the defence of the current chief of staff, Necdet Özel, saying it was out of the question that the army would deliberately bomb its own people.

All this is a far cry from 2009 when Mr Erdoğan launched his "Kurdish opening", an attempt to solve Turkey's long-festering Kurdish problem through a flurry of democratic reforms rather than brutal military tactics. One element of this process was secret talks with the PKK, but these broke down last summer. In an ironic twist Mr Başbuğ, who was then chief of staff, firmly backed Mr Erdoğan.

If found guilty, Mr Başbuğ will be convicted as a "terrorist", a label long reserved for the Kurdish separatists he sought to tame.