India’s slowdown
The case for the defence
Why officials think investors are too bearish about India’s economy

THE SMOG is so bad in Delhi right now that it seeps indoors. In one government building the far end of the corridor seems hazy. But the view of the mandarin working there is clear: India’s economic miracle is not over, regardless of the chatter among investors and howls about government paralysis from industrialists. He pokes fun at the latter. A year ago they were swanning around Davos proclaiming India could grow in its sleep, he says. Now, with growth dipping to 6.9% last quarter, from a peak of 10% (see chart), they are pleading for government action.

Bears in Mumbai, India’s financial capital, worry that GDP growth might slip below 6% as confidence and investment slip. That partly reflects global woes, and partly too the gumming up of the bureaucracy due to a wave of graft allegations. But it is also because no big reforms have taken place for years; and such is the dire state of India’s politics that it is hard to imagine any being imminent. Things reached a nadir at the end of last year when the ruling coalition announced it would allow foreign supermarkets into the country, only to do a U-turn in the face of protests from the opposition and its own coalition partners. Shortly afterwards it failed to carry a key anti-corruption bill through parliament.

The government is not blind to these concerns—in his new-year address the prime minister, Manmohan Singh, conceded that “it would be wrong to conclude that India is now unshakeably set on a process of rapid growth.” But officials in Delhi are more optimistic than the financial markets, for three reasons. First, they argue that growth is bottoming out. Inflation is showing signs of falling, which should allow the central bank to reverse its long series of interest-rate hikes. The recent drop in the rupee is a healthy adjustment, not cause for panic, they say. Meanwhile the euro zone is vaguely getting its act together and there are hints of a recovery in America. Growth, it is thought, will be about 7% for the fiscal year ending in March, respectable enough, and will pick up from there.

Second, the long-term drivers of India’s boom are intact. There is “not much reason to change your mind,” says the mandarin. The rise in the savings rate, which allows more investment, will continue, partly thanks to a demographic bulge of people reaching working age. Even if there is a drop in capital expenditure, it should remain above 30% of GDP—a “handsome level”, says another official, that will boost the country’s potential. The government’s 12th five-year plan, which is due out soon, was originally expected to forecast growth of 9% between 2012 and 2017. That might fall to 8.5%, officials say, but no further.

The final strut of the argument is that the politics are not as bad as they seem. Pessimists, the mandarin says, reckon “we’re just going to fiddle around and miss our opportunities.” But after important elections in February in Uttar Pradesh, the most populous state, the politicians may stop posturing and even co-operate to pass less contentious reforms such as a new national value-added tax. That would cut red tape and the fiscal deficit. And even if parliament stays gridlocked, there are lots of nuts-and-bolts reforms that do not require legislation. The government will try harder to tackle the bottlenecks that choke the power industry, for instance, and the paperwork that is snarling up big projects.

The nub of the official argument is “calm down—and trust us to do just enough.” The trouble is the government has been saying this for a year, and business folk and investors seem to have lost heart. Firms have cut investment and the stockmarket was one of the world’s worst performers in dollar terms last year. Perhaps they are being too jumpy, but India does not have the luxury of dismissing what firms and investors think. The fiscal deficit, including the states and off-balance-sheet items, is running at 9-10% of GDP for the fourth year in a row. The current-account deficit is drifting towards 4% of GDP, officials admit, well above the country’s traditional comfort zone. India needs to command the confidence of domestic and foreign investors. Unless the reform process starts moving there is a risk that the financing of these deficits will become an acute problem—and that India’s economic miracle recedes further into the Delhi haze.