To Infinity and Beyond

THE annual Consumer Electronics Show (CES) feels right at home amid the blazing neon excess of Las Vegas. For four days each January, thousands of companies gather to showcase their flashiest technologies at America's biggest trade show. This year over 20,000 brand new gadgets competed for attendees' attention. Each has its own power cord or battery, and almost every one is either bigger or faster—and thus more power-hungry—than last year's model.

The International Energy Agency expects consumer electronics' appetite for electricity to double over the next decade, from 15% to 30% of residential consumption worldwide. Even supposedly energy-saving innovations, such as the organic-LED (OLED) screen in the massive 55-inch television proudly displayed by South Korea's LG, consume oodles of power, just by dint of being so big.

But this year's show also sees a welcome counter-trend. Several companies launched products labelled as having "infinite power". Such devices are meant to generate at least as much power as they consume. Buy one of these gizmos, the theory goes, and you need never connect it to a wall socket.

Eton Corporation announced Rukus, a portable boom box that can stream music from Bluetooth devices such as smartphones and tablets. For every hour that the Rukus is in full sunlight, it can play an hour of music, harvesting solar energy from 40 square inches (260 square centimetres) of photovoltaic panels. It has an internal battery which stores sunshine for cloudy picnics and can also be tapped to recharge other mobile gadgets.

Similarly impressive is a high-tech cover for Amazon's Kindle ebook reader by Solar Focus (see picture). A solar panel on the outer face gives 90 minutes of reading time for every hour of sunlight. Surplus energy is stored in a small lithium-ion battery and allows an LED reading lamp to run for up to 50 hours without drawing on the Kindle's own battery.

Both the Kindle and the Rukus have frugal monochrome E Ink displays that consume a fraction of the power of the colourful LCD screens found on most gadgets. Even the best solar-panel case for Apple's iPhone, for instance, can do no more than slow the rate at which the smartphone runs down. You might think, then, that something as large as a practical solar-powered electric car would be utterly impossible. Not so, says Ford. At CES, the carmaker showed a domestic solar panel kit it claims will offset all the electricity used over the lifetime of its new Focus Electric plug-in vehicle. The 150 square-foot (14 square-metre) array, to be installed on owners' houses, should feed enough power to the grid as the car draws to recharge its battery. to account for every mile a typical motorist drives. Panels on roofs in rainy Seattle might allow 12,000 miles (19,300km) of driving each year; denizens of sunny Tucson may squeeze out 15,000 miles or more.

The solar kit will set a Ford owner back around $10,000 (the price would be higher were it not for American federal incentives). It comes with a 25-year guarantee—22 years more than the warranty on the car. This is still some way from the dream of a self-contained solar runabout, but it is a start. The increasingly power-hungry electronics industry might will no doubt need to steer itself in a similar direction.