Hungary's troubles
Not just a rap on the knuckles

THE pressure is piling up on the beleaguered Hungarian government. Today the European Commission threatened it with legal action over several new "cardinal" laws that would require a two-thirds majority in parliament to overturn.

The commission is still considering the laws, but today it highlighted concerns over three issues:

 - The independence of the central bank. Late last year the Hungarian parliament passed a law which expands the monetary council and takes the power to nominate deputies away from the governor and hands it to the prime minister. A separate law opens the door to a merger between the bank and the financial regulator.

 - The judiciary. More than 200 judges over the age of 62 have been forced into retirement and hundreds more face the sack. The new National Judicial Authority is headed by Tünde Handó, a friend of the family of Viktor Orban, the prime minister.

 - The independence of the national data authority.

That wasn't all the commission had to say today. Hungary also received a ticking-off from Olli Rehn (pictured), the economic-affairs commissioner, for not doing enough to tackle its budget deficit. It may now lose access to EU funds.

Slammed in Brussels, the Hungarian government is also under pressure at home. Earlier this week Gordon Bajnai, who served as Socialist prime minister from 2009-10, fired off a broadside that sent shockwaves through the political and media establishments.

After a year and a half of government by the right-wing Fidesz party, wrote Mr Bajnai in a lengthy article on the website of the Patriotism and Progress Public Policy Foundation, democracy has been destroyed in Hungary. The country, he warned, is scarred by division and is drifting towards bankruptcy and away from Europe.

Mr Bajnai called for a radical change of government and a complete political re-orientation. “A new government must have a programme readily at hand that can be applied without delay: a programme that promotes the republic, reconciliation, and recovery.” 

Fidesz is rattled by Mr Bajnai, who since leaving office has been teaching at Columbia University in New York. Understandably so. He headed a technocratic administration which stabilised the economy. Unlike his Socialist predecessor, Ferenc Gyurcsany, he was neither part of the old Communist elite nor connected to it by marriage, and so cannot be smeared as a "Komcsi". He is modern in outlook and well regarded internationally.

Moreover, say those how know him, Mr Bajnai has little patience for the narcissistic exceptionalism that shapes Fidesz’s worldview. Exhibit A: the plaintive cry of Janos Martonyi, the foreign minister, who lamented recently: “The world will never understand our pains and spiritual wounds.” Such self-pity is unlikely to endear the Hungarian government to Brussels or Washington DC (to where it has sent an envoy this week to negotiate with the IMF).

Fidesz won a two-thirds majority in 2010. But its support is evaporating, and analysts say there is a gap in the political market for a centrist pro-business party committed to democratic norms. Mr Bajnai, who has not ruled out a return to politics, would be an obvious candidate to lead it.

Meanwhile, as Hungarians watch the value of their assets vaporise, in large part thanks to the government’s increasingly erratic policies, Mr Orban smirks his way through press conferences. Here he is dodging questions from a reporter from HVG, an economics weekly, about his responsibility for the crisis and trying to shift the blame to his old enemy Andras Simor, president of the central bank. The interview ran as follows:

hvg.hu: Do you feel responsible for the falling/weakening forint?

Mr Orban: You mean the president of the central bank? He did not comment on it.

hvg.hu: No, you, Mr prime minister!

Mr Orban: The personal responsibility of the president of the central bank was not discussed over the meeting.

hvg.hu: You, your personal…!

Mr Orban: That neither.

Surrounded by yes-men and grinning flunkies, Mr Orban seems increasingly out of touch. His future will likely be decided not in the gilded corridors of the Hungarian parliament, but in Brussels and Washington DC.

What happens next? If his hand is forced Mr Orban can probably endure policy reversals on the independence of the central bank and the data ombudsman. Sorry, he would say to his loyal followers: national crisis, what can you do.

The dismantling of the judiciary would be another matter. If outsiders keep up the pressure and the judicial changes are judged to be in breach of the EU treaty, Mr Orban would be in a tricky spot. It’s hard to see how he could declare the 200-plus judges his government has forced into retirement ready for office after all, and still sit in his own.